
Ernst Ludwig Kirchner (May 6, 1880 Aschaffenburg  June 15, 1938
Frauenkirch bei Davos)

Ernst Ludwig Kirchner was one of the major visual artists of the avant-
garde in Germany in the first half of the 20th century and is regarded as a
cornerstone of first-generation Expressionism. Raised in a conservative
Protestant family in provincial Chemnitz, he rejected the ideals and
morality of his educated-bourgeois upbringing and chose the bohemian life
of a modern artist. As a young architecture student at the Technische
Hochschule in Dresden (1901  1905), Kirchner mastered naturalistic
rendering, perspectival drawing, and color theory. In his Expressionist
work he exploited these skills while simultaneously challenging their
necessity for modern representation. As a founding member of the artist
group Die Brcke (1905  1913), Kirchner aimed to harness the emotive
essence of subjects derived from daily life, yet extend beyond the largely
optical approach of Realist, Impressionist, and Post-Impressionist art that
was still popular, if not uncontested, in Germany in the first decades of
the century. He participated in Die Brckes communal sketching sessions,
known as the 15-minute nude, and made the human figure a mainstay of his
artwork. Subject matter first explored with Die Brcke remained important
throughout his career, especially motifs derived from the working-class
entertainments of cabaret, circus, variety shows, popular theater, and folk
and modern dance. He excelled in the depiction of unposed nudes in the
studio and in nature, frequently interpreted through the formal
characteristics of Oceanic and African sculpture on display in Dresdens
Ethnographisches Museum. Summer excursions with Die Brcke to the
Moritzburg Lakes near Dresden (1909  1911) and independent trips to the
North Sea island of Fehmarn (1908, 1910, 1912  1914) produced ample fodder
for figurative artworks. These works often featured his Dresden girlfriends
and later Erna Schilling, his life partner whom he met in Berlin in 1912.
After a summer journey to Bohemia in 1911 where he met former Osma artists
including the Czech Cubist Bohumil Kubita, Kirchner became interested in
Cubism and even considered relocating to Paris. Instead, he moved to Berlin
where he remained until the Great War.

In Berlin Kirchner produced city scenes depicting architectural settings as
he had done in Dresden. Immersing himself in the citys nightlife, he
gradually developed a series of Street Scenes heralded as the apex of his
art. These scenes of urban life and street prostitution rendered in his
Berlin Style feature angular contours and hatchwork facture blending his
Expressionist approach with the planar fragmentation of Cubism and the
dynamism of Futurism. Stylistic intermingling led him to experiment with
the spatial effects inherent in diverse media, for example infusing the
compression, rotation, and distortion of wood sculpture or textile motifs
into his compositions in print formats and painting. With the outbreak of
World War I in 1914 Kirchner became concerned for his survival as a visual
artist. He volunteered for the artillery corps to avoid conscription at the
lowest ranks, and increasingly suffered the physical ramifications of a
psychological crisis resulting from existential fears. Assisted by a Brcke
supporter, Kirchner was granted sick leave from military training. He spent
1915 to 1918 convalescing at sanatoria in Knigstein im Taunus; in Berlin;
in Kreuzlingen on the Swiss shores of Lake Constance; and in alpine Davos.
Ever fearful of reenlistment, Kirchner maintained self-destructive
behaviors perpetuating the impression of being unfit for service.

With the close of World War I, Kirchner chose to settle permanently in the
mountainous landscape near Davos. Erna Schilling managed his affairs in
Germany until 1921 when she moved to Switzerland. With her assistance
Kirchner maintained an active studio practice through the 1920s and 1930s.
He continued producing artworks in diverse media, added to his repertoire
subjects derived from local peasant life and alpine vistas. Visits to
Zurich, Basel, Bern, and Winterthur produced scenes of city life and urban
amusements; the latter were supplemented by activities staged in his studio
and in the surrounding forest. Kirchner remained committed to an anti-
bourgeois lifestyle and yet also desired the respectability of recognition
as a master artist. He mentored a cohort of young artists who formed the
group Rot-Blau in Basel and was elected to the Prussian Academy of Fine
Art. Beginning in winter 1925/26, he visited Germany on several occasions
and recorded his desire to secure a professorship at an art academy, a
desire that was never fulfilled. At this time he redirected his
Expressionist style toward figural abstraction. Kirchner also wrote
extensively while living in Switzerland. In addition to copious
correspondence with patrons and collaborators on book projects about his
work, he also wrote theoretical and critical texts, often published under
the pseudonym Louis de Marsalle. Some of these writings indicate his sense
of competition with contemporary artists while others reveal a fine-tuned
understanding of technique and the conceptual ramifications of working from
nature and from the imagination. The Nazis 1937 exhibition of Degenerate
Art confiscated from public institutions in Germany included 639 works by
Kirchner, more than any other artist except Emil Nolde. Chronic anxiety
accompanied by existential fears due to the increasing visibility of Nazis
in the Grisons following Austrian Annexation led Kirchner to shoot himself
on June 15, 1938.

Key Bibliographic Works

   Lothar Grisebach, Ernst Ludwig Kirchners Davoser Tagebuch, 2nd edition
   ed. Lucius Grisebach (Stuttgart: Verlag Gerd Hatje, 1997).


   Donald E. Gordon, Ernst Ludwig Kirchner (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
   University Press, 1968).


   Annemarie Dube and Wold-Dieter Dube, E. L. Kirchner: Das graphische Werk,
   2 vols. 3rd edition (Munich: Prestel-Verlag, 1991).


   Jill Lloyd and Magdalena M. Moeller, eds, Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, 1880-
   1938, exh. cat. (London: Royal Academy of Art, 2003).


   Reinhold Heller, ed. Brcke: The Birth of Expressionism in Dresden and
   Berlin, 1905-1913 (Ostfildern: Hatje Cantz, 2009).


Suggested links

Kirchner-Museum Davos http://www.kirchnermuseum.ch

Brcke-Museum Berlin http://www.bruecke-museum.de

E. L. Kirchner Archiv, Wichtrach bei Bern http://www.henze-
ketterer.ch/de/kirchner.php

Kirchner-Haus Aschaffenburg http://www.kirchnerhaus-aschaffenburg.de

Museum fr Vlkerkunde Dresden www.voelkerkunde-dresden.de

MoMA map of sites relevant to German Expressionism
http://www.moma.org/explore/collection/ge/maps/german_empire

Ernst Ludwig Kirchner Verein Fehmarn
http://www.kirchnervereinfehmarn.de/lebensdaten.php


Suggested images (available online)

Kirchner, Mdchen auf Fehmarn, 1913/20. Oil on canvas, 125 x 90 cm.
http://www.kirchnervereinfehmarn.de/

Kirchner, Street, Berlin, 1913. Oil on canvas, 47 1/2 x 35 7/8" (120.6 x
91.1 cm).  Museum of Modern Art, New York.
http://www.moma.org/explore/multimedia/audios/261/3023 (includes audiocast)

Kirchner, Berliner Strassenszene, 1913. Oil on canvas,  47 7/8 x 35 7/8 in.
(121.6 x 91.1 cm.) Neue Galerie, New York.
http://www.christies.com/LotFinder/lot_details.aspx?intObjectID=4807488

Kirchner, wood sculptures at Staatsgalerie Stuttgart
http://www.staatsgalerie.de/ausstellung/rueckblick/kirchner

Kirchner, Artillerymen(Das Soldatenbad), 1915. Oil on canvas, 55 1/8 x 59
1/8 inches (140 x 153 cm) Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York.
http://www.guggenheim.org/new-york/collections/collection-online/show-
full/piece/?search=Artillerymen&page=&f=Title&object=88.3591

Kirchner, Winter Moonlit Night (Wintermondnacht), (1919). Woodcut, 12 x 11
5/8" (30.5 x 29.5 cm) Museum of Modern Art, New York.
http://www.moma.org/collection_ge/object.php?object_id=70114

Kirchner, book illustration for Georg Heyms Umbra vitae (1924)
http://www.moma.org/collection_ge/browse_results.php?object_id=26663

Kirchner, Self-Portrait, c. 1928. Watercolor. Promised Gift of Mr. and Mrs.
Jacob Kainen , National Gallery of Art, Washington D.C.
http://www.nga.gov/exhibitions/2001/centdraw/056fs.shtm
