



Kiyoko Mitsuyama-Wdowiak

Koga, Harue (, 1895-1933)

Koga Harue is one of the most important of the pre-war Japanese Surrealist
painters. He was born into a Buddhist family which ran a temple in Kurume
City. After studying to be a Buddhist monk, he left to be a painter,
travelling Tokyo at the age of seventeen. In the capital he attended the
Institute of the Pacific Ocean Painting Association [Taiheiygakai
Kenkyjo] and then the Japanese Watercolour Institute [Nihon-Suisaigakai
Kenkyjo]. Whilst watercolour was always his favourite media, he also
explored oil painting, developing his creations using diverse styles with a
keen interest in various contemporary European artists, including Czanne,
the Cubists and Paul Klee. The year 1922 marked his success and secured his
role in the Japanese art world: he won the Nika Prize and became one of the
founding members of the avant-garde group Action. After 1929, his
paintings began to show Surrealistic tendencies. The Sea (Umi, 1929)
established his position as the leading Japanese Surrealist. Being inspired
by the avant-garde methods of collage and photomontage, Koga composed
graphic and photographic images taken from printed matter including both
Japanese and international magazines. The images in this work celebrated
modernity in an optimistic manner just before the country entered the
Fifteen-year War.

References and Further Reading


Moriyama, Hideko (ed.) (2001) Koga Harue: Ssaku no Genten [Koga Harue :
Exploring the Origins of His Art through His Works and Materials], Tokyo:
Bridgestone Museum of Art; Kurume: Ishibashi Museum of Art.

Moriyama, Hideko et al. (eds.) (2010) Koga Harue no Zenb [Koga Harue: A
Retrospective], Tokyo: The Tokyo Shimbun.

The National Museum of Modern Art, Tokyo (ed.) (1991) Koga Harue: Ssaku no
Prosesu [Harue Koga: The Creative Process], Tokyo: The National Museum of
Modern Art, Tokyo.




