
Akinola Lasekan (b. 1916 Ipele, Nigeria  d. 1972 Ife, Nigeria)

Akinola Lasekan was a Nigerian painter, illustrator, and political
cartoonist. As an art teacher during the transition from colonial rule to
independence, Lasekan was among the artists who helped define modern
Nigerian art. He was a cartoonist for the independence newspaper, the West
African Pilot, owned by Nnamdi Azikiwe. Lasekan also illustrated Chike
Mbadughas biography of Azikiwe, Zik of Africa. Lasekan promoted his ideas
of modern African art as a hybrid of traditional African practices and
modern European art, influencing artists such as Uche Okeke. In 1961 he
began lecturing at the University of Nigeria, Nsukka. During the civil war
he took a teaching appointment at the University of Ife (now Obafemi
Awolowo University), where he stayed until his death. In 1962 he was
elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts in London. His work is in the
collection of the Nigerian National Gallery of Art and was exhibited during
the Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture (FESTAC) in
1977.

References and further reading:


Lasekan, A. (1989) Problems of Contemporary African Artists, in Kurio
Africana: Journal of Art and Criticism, 1 (1): 24-34 (reprinted from
unstated earlier source).

Lasekan, A. and Mbadugha, C. (1958) Zik of Africa. Onitsha, Nigeria.

Olaniyan, T. (2002) Cartooning Nigerian Anticolonial Nationalism, Images
and empires: visuality in colonial and postcolonial Africa edited by P.
Landau and D. Kaspin. Berkeley: University of California Press, 124-140.


List of Works:

Akinola Lasekan, The last Political Mission of Herbert Macaulay, Date
unknown, oil on canvas.

Akinola Lasekan. The Story of Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe, Date unknown, oil on
canvas.


