
Alla G. Vronskaya
Massachusetts Institute of Technology / State Institute for Art Studies,
Moscow

Lissitzky, El (1890-1941)

[pic]
El Lissitzky, Self-Portrait (The Constructor), 1924
http://designpublic.in/blog/what-is-the-relationship-between-innovation-and-
design/


The Soviet artist, photographer, designer, and architect Lazar Markovich
(Mordukhaevich) Lissitzky grew up in a Jewish family in Smolensk in western
Russia. In 1909 Lissitzky moved to Germany, where he studied architectural
engineering at Darmstadt Technische Hochschule. While living in Germany,
Lissitzky travelled throughout Europe and became connected with the circle
of Russian-Jewish painters in Paris. With the advent of the First World
War, he was forced to return to Russia. There, Lissitzky enrolled into the
Riga Polytechnic Institute (today in Latvia), which was in evacuation in
Moscow during the war, and continued pursuing his interest in Jewish
culture. At that time, alongside such artists as Marc Chagall, Lissitzky
was one of the major protagonists of the Jewish Renaissance, which took
place in the former Russian Empire after the 1917 Soviet Revolution
abolished anti-Semitic tsarist laws and regulations. Lissitzkys most
famous works from this period are richly illustrated children books, such
as Had gadya [One Goat], a traditional Passover song.

In 1919, after an invitation from Chagall, Lissitzky became the head of the
architecture department at the Higher Artistic Workshops in Vitebsk (a
small town in contemporary Belarus with a significant Jewish population,
where Lissitzky also lived as a child). The school was soon joined by
Kazimir Malevich, whose presence stimulated Lissitzkys growing interest in
Suprematism. In 1920, Malevich led the artistic group UNOVIS (from Russian
utverditeli novogo iskusstva, those who affirm the new art), which aimed
at politicizing Suprematism and transforming it into a weapon of mass
propaganda through posters, wall painting, and colourful street
decorations. Some of Lissitzkys best-known work of the period 
Suprematist propaganda posters such as Beat the Whites with the Red Wedge
(1920) and The Machines of Depots and Factories are Waiting for You. Lets
Move Production! (1920)  was produced within the framework of the UNOVIS
programme. The UNOVIS agenda also shaped Lissitzkys own idiosyncratic art
form, which he conceived in Vitebsk and continued to develop during the
following years: the Proun (from Russian proekt utverzhdenia novogo, a
project for the affirmation of the new). Imagined as a laboratory rather
than a mass art form, Prouns aimed to bridge painting and architecture,
supplementing the conventions of Suprematist geometric representation with
three-dimensional geometric forms, perspectival constructions, and
axonometry (a method of architectural representation based on projection
and popular among modernist architects).

In 1921, Lissitzky accepted the position of a cultural representative of
Russia in Germany and left for Berlin, where he acted as the intermediary
between left Russian and Western artists (organizing, for example, the
First Soviet Art Exhibition in Berlin and Amsterdam in 1922-23). In 1922,
together with the Russian-Jewish writer Ilya Ehrenburg, Lissitzky published
the trilingual journal Veshch-Gegenstand-Objekt, which was devoted to all
aspects of modernist artistic production across Europe. In Berlin,
Lissitzky became associated with the leaders of European modernism: Moholy-
Nagy, Theo Van Doesburg, and the Dadaists, most notably, Kurt Schwitters
(with whom he co-authored an essay Nasci for the Dadaist journal Merz).
In 1923, during Vladimir Mayakovskys stay in Berlin, Lissitzky designed
the poets book For the Voice [Dlia golosa] in a style more Constructivist
than Suprematist. The next year, after a flare-up of tuberculosis, Lissizky
moved to a sanatorium in Locarno, Switzerland, where he continued an
association with Dadaism, co-authoring the illustrated brochure Die
Kunstismen with Jean Arp in 1925. During his Swiss sojourn, Lissizky worked
with advertisement designs, typography and photography, experimenting with
various techniques of photographic manipulation and photomontage in such
works as the 1924 self-portrait commonly known as The Constructor.

In 1925 Lissizky returned to Moscow, where he became active as an architect
and furniture designer, teaching at the Wood and Metal Department of
VKhUTEIN (Higher Art and Technical Institute, formerly VKhUTEMAS). At this
period, Lissitzky was an active member of the architectural group ASNOVA
(Association of New Architects), led by architect Nikolai Ladovskii. In
opposition to the Constructivists, ASNOVA developed the Rationalist
approach to architecture, which was based on studies of spatial perception
and emphasized formal expressivity as the goal of architectural work.
Developing an interest in high-rise architecture that had begun in Germany
(Lissizkys projects for Wolkenbgel, a horizontal sky-scraper, were
devised in 1923-25), in 1926 Lissitzky co-edited (with Ladovskii ) the
first and only issue of Izvestia ASNOVA (ASNOVA Newsletter), devoted to
skyscraper construction. Lissizkys only realized architectural project was
the printing plant of the journal Ogoniok in Moscow (1930-32).

In 1925, Lissitzky began work as an exhibition designer, an activity that
would remain his predominant occupation for the rest of his life. He
designed Raum fr Konstruktive Kunst [Room for Constructive Art] at the
Internationale Kunstausstellung in Dresden in 1925-26 and Abstraktes
Kabinett in Hanover in 1927-28. In 1928, he worked on the Soviet sections
of the Pressa exhibition in Cologne and the Film und Foto exhibition in
Stuttgart, as well as the All-Union Polygraphic Exhibition in Moscow. Among
Lissizkys other major exhibition projects were Soviet pavilions at the
Hygiene exhibition in Dresden and the International Fur Exhibition in
Leipzig (both 1930), the Permanent Construction Exhibition in Moscow
(1930s), the Soviet pavilion for the International Aviation Exhibition in
Paris (1932), the International Exhibition in New York (1939), and the All-
Soviet Agricultural Exhibition (193441). As the chief architect of the
Park of Culture and Leisure in Moscow in 1929-33, Lissitzky introduced the
solutions he had developed for exhibition design into the emerging practice
of Soviet landscape architecture.

During the late 1920s and the 1930s, Lissitzky was also actively working
with photomontage and book design. Accused of promoting totalitarianism by
later Western scholars, his photomontage work of the period included a
large (24 x 3.5 meters) montage for the Soviet pavilion at the Pressa
exhibition. Lissitzkys major employment as a book designer was his
continuous work (193241) on the general layout and cover design of
international propaganda journal SSSR na stroike [USSR in Construction],
where he was responsible for the design of the most ideologically important
issues of the journal: those devoted to the Stalinist Constitution, the Red
Army, the Navy, and the Dnepr Hydroelectric Station. Among the other
journals designed by Lissitzky were Arkhitektura SSSR [Architecture of the
USSR], Industria sotsializma [Socialist Industry], Sovetskaia Gruzia
[Soviet Georgia], and Sovetskie Subtropiki [Soviet Subtropics].

Key Works

1920        Beat the Whites with the Red Wedge.

1920        The Machines of Depots and Factories are Waiting for You. Lets
Move Production!

1923        For the Voice (Dlia golosa).

1924        The Constructor, self-portrait.

1925        Die Kunstismen (with Jean Arp).

1930-32     Ogoniok Building, Moscow.

1925-26     Raum fr Konstruktive Kunst (Room for Constructive Art) at the
           Internationale Kunstausstellung, Dresden, Germany.

1927-28     Abstraktes Kabinett, Hanover, Germany.

1928  Soviet section of the Pressa exhibition, Cologne, Germany.

1928  Film und Foto exhibition, Stuttgart, Germany.

1928        All-Union Polygraphic Exhibition, Moscow.

1932-41     SSSR na stroike (USSR in Construction).


References and further reading

Lissitzky-Kuppers, S. (1968) El Lissitzky: Life, Letters, Texts. London:
Thames and Hudson.

Buchloh, B. (1984) From Faktura to Factography, October, October, # 30,
Fall, 82-119.

Margolin, V. (1997) The Struggle for Utopia: Rodchenko, Lissitzky, Moholy-
Nagy: 19171946. University of Chicago Press.

Tupitsyn, M. (1999) El Lissitzky: Beyond the Abstract Cabinet. Yale
University Press,.

Perloff, N. and Reed, B., eds. (2003) Situating El Lissitzky: Vitebsk,
Berlin, Moscow. Los Angeles: Getty Research Institute.

Visual Material

[pic]
Illustration of Chad Gadya from the Haggadah, 1917
https://www.artfinder.com/work/illustration-for-chad-gadya-from-the-
haggadah-el-lissitzky/

[pic]
Beat the Whites with the Red Wedge, Poster, 1920 http://plakat-
ussr.blogspot.com/2008/07/blog-post_12.html

[pic]
Proun, 1922-1923 Copyright: Museum of Modern Art, New York,
http://www.moma.org/collection/browse_results.php?criteria=O%3AAD%3AE%3A3569
&page_number=38&template_id=1&sort_order=1


Vladimir Mayakovsky, Dlia golosa, Moscow: Gosudarstvennoe izd-vo, 1923
(book design by El Lissitzky)
http://www.christies.com/lotfinder/lot/maiakovsky-vladimir-et-el-lissitzky-
1918730-details.aspx?pos=2&intObjectID=1918730&sid=&page=9

[pic]
Project of Abstract Cabinet, Hannover, 1927
http://www.tumblr.com/tagged/el%20lissitzky

[pic]
Ogonek Printing Plant, Moscow, 1930-1933
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:EL-LISITZKY-OGONYOK-1.jpg

[pic]
Soviet Pavilion at the Pressa Exhibition, Cologne, 1928.
http://www.liveauctioneers.com/item/11573985_lissitzky-el-pavilion-of-the-
soviet-union-at-pr

[pic]
USSR in Construction, 1933, #9. Design by El Lissitzky.
http://www.russianartandbooks.com/cgi-bin/russianart/02853R



