
Sarah Rogers

                                                                   308 words

Mansour, Sliman (b.1947, Palestine)

Born in 1947 in Birzeit, a Palestinian town north of Ramallah, Sliman
Mansour studied fine arts at Bezalel Art Academy in Jerusalem. Since the
1970s, his works on paper have contributed to the development of a visual
iconography of the Palestinian struggle: the orange tree (symbol of the
1948 Nakba), the olive tree (symbol of the 1967 war), traditional
Palestinian embroidery, village life, and the Palestinian woman as the
mother figure of Palestine, giving birth to and protecting the Palestinian
people. In 1987, together with artists Vera Tamari, Tayseer Barakat, and
Nabil Anani, Mansour founded New Visions, a collective formed in response
to the first intifada (1987-93). Boycotting art supplies imported from
Israel, the artists worked instead with natural materials (coffee, henna,
and clay), thereby tying the process of art making to both the land and the
struggle. Art no longer merely represented the political, but instead
artistic production itself constituted a political act. Mansour has since
become known for using mud as a medium. Layering and molding mud into
figural compositions on wooden frameworks, Mansour deploys the actual land
to depict Palestine, its history, and people with the cracks and
distortions of the drying process suggestive of the impermanence of
materiality and the passage of time.

References and further reading:

AlHoash interview with Sliman Mansour, accessed November 15 2013,
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tOBoHRnuXqA.

Ali, Wijdan (1997) Palestine, Modern Islamic Art: Development and
Continuity, Gainesville: University of Press of Florida, 105-113.

Ankori, Gannit (2006)Earth: Sliman Mansour, Palestinian Art, London:
Reaktion Books, 60-92.

Boullata, Kamal (2009) Palestinian Art: From 1850 to the Present, London:
Saqi, 260, 261, 292.

Shabout, Nada (2007) Modern Arab Art: Formation of Arab Aesthetics,
University Press of Florida, 50-54.

Shammout, Ismail (1989) Art in Palestine, trans. Abdul-Qader Daher, Kuwait:
Al Qabas Printing Press.

Sherwell, Tina (2003) Imaging the Homeland: Gender and Palestinian
National Discourses, Thamyris/Intersecting 10 (2003): 123-145.





