
Kerry Nguyen-Long.

Nam Son (Nam Sn), born Nguyen Van Tho (Nguyn Vn Th) (1890-1973) in
Hanoi (H Ni)
 Nam Son was co-founder of the LEcole des Beaux-Arts de lIndochine
(EBAI), which opened its doors in Hanoi in 1925. As a talented artist his
work drew on Vietnamese, Chinese, and French influences. Born into a
scholarly family his traditional education was followed by secondary
education at a French colonial school which secured his employment in the
colonial administrative system, while he simultaneously worked as an
illustrator for several local magazines. He long aspired to establish a
fine arts school in Hanoi and an encounter with Frenchman Victor Tardieu
(1870-1937), in Hanoi in 1923, afforded Nam Son opportunity to share this
aspiration,  in fact Nam Son had already drawn up tentative plans for such
a venture. Tardieu, a recipient of the Prix d Indochine, presented a
proposal to Governor-General Henri Merlin which was subsequently approved.
Early 1925 Nam Son accompanied Tardieu to Paris to recruit teachers and buy
materials. While there he studied at the workshops of Jean-Pierre Laurens
(1875-1932) and Felix Aubert (1866-1940) and encountered young Japanese and
Chinese artists similarly exploring the European arts scene, among them Xu
Beihong (1895-1953) with whom he established a life-long friendship.

References and Further Reading

de Menonville, Corinne. (2003) Vietnamese Painting: From Tradition to
Modernity, Castillon-du-Gard: Les Editions d' Art et d' Histoire.

Ngoc, Huu and Viet, Hoai. (February 2003) "An Artistic Legacy Revisited,"
in, Vietnam Cultural Windows,no. 59.

Nguyen-Long, Kerry. (2013)Arts of Viet Nam 1009-1945,The Gioi Publishers:
Hanoi.



