
Carol Rigolot
Humanities Council, Department of French and Italian
crigolot@princeton.edu
258-4719

                        Saint-John Perse  (1887-1975)
Recipient of the 1960 Nobel Prize for Literature, poet-diplomat Saint-John
Perse/Alexis Leger moved to France after a childhood in Guadeloupe and
immediately began writing about his lost Eden. These Eloges [Praises, 1911]
still feel modern in their kaleidoscopic juxtaposition of images and
sensations. Posted in China during World War I, he wrote his masterpiece,
Anabase [Anabasis], about the founding of a city. T.S. Eliot loved this
poem, translated it in 1924, and put it on the Anglo-American literary map.
Rainer Maria Rilke and Giuseppe Ungaretti made it famous throughout Europe.
To separate his literary and diplomatic careers, Leger adopted the strange
pseudonym which combines biblical, classical and mythological reminiscences
(Perse is the French name for the god Perseus and the Roman poet Persius).
Resolutely anti-Hitler, he was exiled in 1940 by the collaborationist
French government and spent the next 18 years in Washington. Across 21 long
poems, he traces the path of one protagonist  successively child, prince,
exile, lover, poet, artist and old man -- in an uvre that is both
Whitmanesque in its epic scope and Mallarmean in its enigmatic ellipses.

St.-John Perse, Collected Poems (bilingual edition), tr. W.H. Auden, H.
Chisholm, D. Devlin, T.S. Eliot, R. Fitzgerald, W. Fowlie, R. Howard, L.
Varse. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1983.

The Fondation Saint-John Perse in Aix-en-Provence is an invaluable resource
and archive: http://www.fondationsaintjohnperse.fr/html/fondation.htm
