
Pull My Daisy

Laura E. B. Key (University of Liverpool)

Pull My Daisy (1959) is a short film directed by Alfred Leslie and Robert
Frank, understood as an early example of New American Cinema and strongly
associated with the Beat Generation.



Pull My Daisy has an improvisational style, in which narration and action
seem unscripted  although there is some critical debate over whether this
is a deliberate production technique (Allan 1988). This style of filmmaking
is considered modernist as it rejects cinematic convention in favour of
creative freedom. The storyline, a comedy inspired by key Beat figures Neal
and Carolyn Cassady, is adapted from Jack Kerouacs play The Beat
Generation, and features a dinner party interrupted by the arrival of the
hosts wayward friends. Kerouac narrated the film, which also stars painter
Larry Rivers and Beat poets Allen Ginsberg, Gregory Corso and Peter
Orlovsky. The film title is taken from the poem of the same name written by
Kerouac, Ginsberg and Cassady in the 1940s (Kerouac, 1971). It offers
commentary on important social issues such as politics, gender, sexuality
and religion. In 1996, the film was preserved in the United Stated National
Film registry at the Library of Congress, having been deemed of cultural,
historical and/or aesthetic significance.



Video Link: http://vimeo.com/55668342

Embed code: <iframe src=//player.vimeo.com/video/55668342 width=500
height=375 frameborder=0 webkitallowfullscreen mozallowfullscreen
allowfullscreen></iframe> <p><a href=http://vimeo.com/55668342>Pull My
Daisy (Robert Frank 1959)</a> from <a
href=http://vimeo.com/user5187485>Vladimir</a> on <a
href=https://vimeo.com>Vimeo</a>.</p> yj





References and Further Reading



Allan, B. (1988) The Making (and Unmaking) of Pull My Daisy, Film History
vol. 2 (3): 185-205.



Kerouac, J. (1971) Scattered Poems. San Francisco, C.A.: City Lights.



Kouvaros, G. (2012) Time and How to Note it Down: The Lessons of Pull My
Daisy, Screen vol. 53 (1): 1-17.



