
Herbert R. Hartel, Jr.
196-41 69th Avenue
2nd floor
Fresh Meadows, NY 11365

ALFRED STIEGLITZ                             Word Count: 512

Alfred Stieglitz (1864-1946) was an American art collector, dealer and
photographer who was one of the earliest supporters of modernist art in the
United States. Stieglitz was born in 1865 in Hoboken, New Jersey, to an
affluent German-Jewish family. He studied at City College in New York for
two years and then at the Technische Hochschule in Berlin for three years,
before returning to New York. Although trained in engineering, Stieglitz
became interested in photography while in Germany. He promoted photography
as a legitimate form of art and expression, which was a radical idea at the
time. This led him to establish, in 1902, the Photo-Secession, a group of
photographers who believed that photography needed to be considered a fine
art and not a technical, manual craft. In 1903 Steiglitz started Camera
Work, his own publication on modern art, which he published until 1917.
Camera Work published photographs, reproductions of modernist artworks, and
essays, treatises, statements and criticism about modernist art and theory.
In 1904, Stieglitz opened his first gallery, the Little Galleries of the
Photo-Secession (later known as 291 for its address on Fifth Avenue),
where he introduced the European avant-garde to the USA.  He donated works
for the Armory Show in New York in 1913 and also purchased works from the
exhibition.

Stieglitz created numerous socially conscious photographs that recorded the
conditions of urban life and the poor, including The Terminal (1893) and
The Steerage (1907). He produced countless photographs of family, friends,
artists, writers, critics and collectors, the most compelling of which are
those of his wife Georgia OKeeffe. In the 1920s and 1930s, Stieglitz
photographed many of the new skyscrapers that transformed American cities.
In the 1920s he did a large group of close-ups of clouds that he called
Equivalents, in which he explored the abstract beauty and elusive
tangibility of nature. Stieglitz held some of the earliest exhibitions in
the U.S. of modernist European and American art, as well as art from Africa
and tribal societies, at his galleries in New York City. At 291, open from
1904 to 1917, Stieglitz held some of the earliest American exhibitions of
Paul Czanne, Henri Matisse, Pablo Picasso, Auguste Rodin, Henri de
Toulouse-Lautrec, Constantin Brancusi, Henri Rousseau, Marius de Zayas,
Francis Picabia, African tribal sculpture, and ancient Mexican pottery.
Stieglitz operated the Intimate Gallery from 1925 to 1929 and An American
Place from 1935 until his death (it remained open until 1950). At all his
galleries, he exhibited the work of several American modernists to whom he
was extremely devoted, including Arthur Dove, Marsden Hartley, OKeeffe,
John Marin, Charles Demuth, Alfred Maurer, Max Weber, and Abraham
Walkowitz.  He bought many of their works when few collectors would and
often provided them with financial help.

References and Further Reading
Green, J. ed. (1973) Camera Work: A Critical Anthology, New York: Aperture,
1973.
Greenough, S., et al. (2000). Modern Art in America: Alfred Stieglitz and
      His New York Galleries, Washington, D.C.: National Gallery of Art.
Homer, W. I. (1977) Alfred Stieglitz and the American Avant-Garde, Boston:
      New York Graphic Society.
[pic]
The Steerage, 1907. Alfred Stieglitz (American, 18641946). Photogravure on
vellum; 12 11/16x10 3/16 in. (32.2 x 25.8 cm).Alfred Stieglitz Collection,
1933 (33.43.419). http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/works-of-art/33.43.419

