
Author: Chris GoGwilt

Pramoedya Ananta Toer (Blora, 1925  Bogor, 2006) was Indonesias most
famous modern novelist. His writing career began during the period of
Japanese occupation and in the years of revolutionary struggle for
independence (1945  1949) that followed from the Dutch attempt to reimpose
colonial rule over the former Dutch East Indies.  A prominent member of the
so-called Generation of 45 (Angkatan 45), Pramoedya became one of the
most celebrated prose-writers to use the modern and modernizing language of
bahasa Indonesia (adopted by the nationalist Oath of Youth in 1928 and
later established as the national language of the newly independent
Republic of Indonesia).  Closely associated with the Third World
nationalist aspirations of Indonesias President, Sukarno, and a leading
spokesperson for left-wing literary engagement in the early 1960s,
Pramoedya was singled out for persecution in the so-called events of 1965
(peristiwa 1965) when an aborted military coup became the pretext for the
massive wave of violence orchestrating the toppling of Sukarno and the rise
of Suhartos New Order regime (1966  1998).  Pramoedya was arrested and
imprisoned and then, along with thousands of other political prisoners
(tapol), was shipped to the remote penal colony of Buru Island where he was
interned from 1969 until 1979.  It was there that Pramoedya composed the so-
called Buru tetralogy of historical novels about the origins of Indonesian
anti-colonial nationalism (Bumi Manusia, Anak Semua Bangsa, Jejak Langkah,
and Rumah Kaca).  This quartet of novels established his international
reputation as Indonesias most prominent novelist, and a perennial
contender for the Nobel prize for literature.  Following his release from
Buru Island in 1979, Pramoedya was held under city arrest, his books were
banned in Indonesia, while outside Indonesia he became the countrys most
recognized dissident. Although much of his work had been destroyed during
his arrest, and although the Buru quartet was banned (and long prison
sentences given to students found reading he novels), Pramoedya tirelessly
worked to finish the quartet, publish the manuscripts of two more large-
scale historical novels composed on Buru (Arus Balik and Arok Dedes), a
play (Mangir), and two volumes of prison memoirs (Nyanyi Sunyi Seorang Bisu
I and II; translated into English as the one-volume The Mutes Soliloquy).
When the Suharto New Order regime collapsed in 1998, Pramoedyahis works
still officially bannedwas preparing for the Indonesian publication of all
of his works, republishing works already published but banned and
publishing works that had never yet been printed.  In 1999 Pramoedya
traveled outside Indonesia for the first time since before his arrest in
1965, touring North America and Europe and receiving honorary doctorates
and awards. Although he was never awarded the Nobel prize for literature
(for which he was nominated several times), Pramoedya was the recipient of
numerous other awards and honorary degrees, including the Ramon Magsaysay
award in 1995.  Following the collapse of the Suharto regime, Pramoedya
once again became a prominent public figure within Indonesia, although he
remained sharply critical of post-New Order Indonesia.  Up to the very end
of his life, Pramoedya remained true to the revolutionary ideals of
Indonesian anti-colonial nationalism. A few months before his death in
2006, in a set of interviews in which he described himself as living in
internal exile and burning inside at the thought of the corruption
destroying Indonesia, he thought only a total revolution could solve the
countrys problems.

Select Works:

What follows is a chronological listing of works by Pramoedya that have
been translated into English. This does not include major works not yet
fully translated into English, such as the early novel Gerilya Keluarga
[Guerilla Family] and collections of short stories that appeared during the
1950s; nor does it include some of the work composed in Buru prison camp
(notably, the novel Arus Balik [The Turning of the Tide]) or the historical
work re-published following his release from Buru (notably, the two-volume
study of Kartini, the biography of Tirto Adi Suryo, Sang Pemula, and the
anthology of pre-Indonesian literature, Tempo Doeloe).

Perburuan (Jakarta, 1950); The Fugitive (trans Willem Samuels, New York,
1990)

Bukan Pasarmalam (Jakarta, 1950); Its Not an All Night Fair (trans C. W.
Watson; Penguin, 2001)

Cerita dari Blora (Jakarta, 1952); All That Is Gone: Stories (trans. Willem
Samuels; Penguin, 2004)

Tjerita Dari Djakarta (Jakarta, 1957); Tales from Djakarta: Caricatures of
Circumstances and their Human Beings (Ithaca, NY: Southeast Asia Program
Publications, 1999)

Bumi Manusia (Jakarta, 1980); This Earth of Mankind (trans. Max Lane;
Penguin, 1996)

Anak Semua Bangsa (Jakarta, 1980); Child of All Nations (trans. Max Lane;
Penguin, 1996)

Jejak Langkah (Jakarta, 1985); Footsteps (trans. Max Lane; Penguin, 1990)

Gadis Pantai (Jakarta, 1987); The Girl from the Coast (trans Willem
Samuels; Penguin, 2002)

Rumah Kaca (Jakarta, 1988); House of Glass (trans. Max Lane; Penguin, 1992)

Nyanyi Sunyi Seorang Bisu: Catatan-catatan dari Buru. 2 Volumes (1995;
1997); The Mutes Soliloquy (trans. Willem Samuels; Penguin, 1999)

Hoakiau di Indonesia (Jakarta, 1995); The Chinese of Indonesia (Singapore,
2007)

Arok Dedes (Jakarta, 1999); Arok of Java (trans. Max Lane; Singapore, 2007)

Saya Terbakar Amarah: Pramoedya Ananta Toer dalam Perbincangan dengan Andr
Vltchek & Rossie Indira (Jakarta, 2006); Exile: Pramoedya Ananta Toer in
Conversation with Andr Vltchek and Rossie Indira (Haymarket Books, 2006)

Bibliography:

Anderson, Benedict. Sembah-Sumpah: The Politics of Language and Javanese
Culture. Chapter 6 of Language and Power: Exploring Political Cultures in
Indonesia. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1990. Pp.194-237. (Discusses the political
and cultural significance of Pramoedyas language.)

--. Ed. & trans. Perburuan 1950 and Keluarga Gerilya 1950. Indonesia 36
(October 1983), 25-48. (Translation of Pramoedyas comments on his
beginnings as a writer.)

Cheah, Pheng.  Spectral Nationality: Passages of Freedom from Kant to
Postcolonial Literatures of Liberation. New York: Columbia UP, 2003.
(Chapters 6 and 7 offer a reading of the Buru Quartet.)

GoGwilt, Christopher. The Passage of Literature: Genealogies of Modernism
in Conrad, Rhys, and Pramoedya. New York: Oxford UP, 2011. (A reading of
Pramoedyas work and its significance for transnational modernism.)

---.  The Voice of Pramoedya Ananta Toer: Passages, Interviews, and
Reflections from The Mutes Soliloquy and Pramoedyas North American Tour.
Cultural Critique 55 (Fall 2003), 217-46. (Discusses The Mutes Soliloquy
and Pramoedyas U.S. visit in 1999.)

Hering, Bob. Pramoedya Ananta Toer 70 Tahun: Essays to Honour Pramoedya
Ananta Toers 70th Year. Stein, Netherlands: Yayasan Kabar Seberang, III,
nos. 24/5, 1995. (Collection of essays by a range of different critics.)

Hitchcock, Peter. The Long Space: Transnationalism and Postcolonial Form.
Stanford: Stanford UP, 2010. (Chapter 4 offers a reading of the Buru
Quartet.)

Maier, Hendrik. We Are Playing Relatives: A Survey of Malay Writing.
Leiden: KITLV Press, 2004. (Situates Pramoedyas work within the general
context of Malay and Indonesian modernism.)

Mrzek, Rudolf.  Epilogue to Engineers of Happy Land: Technology and
Nationalism in a Colony. Princeton: Princeton UP, 2002. (The Epilogue
offers a unique reading of the Nyanyi Sunyi Seorang Bisu.)

Siegel, James.  Fetish, Recognition, Revolution. Princeton: Princeton UP,
1997. (Part I is based on Pramoedyas historical research into early
Indonesian modernism; the Epilogue translates and comments on one of
Pramoedyas early short stories.)

Vickers, Adrian. A History of Modern Indonesia. Cambridge: Cambridge UP,
2005. (A history of modern Indonesia premised on a reading of Pramoedyas
work.)





