
      CHARLES CHAPLIN (Charlie Chaplin).

      Charles Spenser Chaplin was born in London, England on April 16, 1889
and died on Christmas Day, 1977 at home in Corsier-sur-Vevey, Switzerland.
He had been famous across the world since his Tramp persona first hit
screens in 1914, and besides earning numerous film awards, he was knighted
in 1975. Chaplin took to the stage in 1898, and came to the US in 1910 on
tour with a British vaudeville troupe. In December 1913, he joined the
Keystone Pictures studio in Hollywood with whom he made hits like The Kid
(1921) and The Gold Rush (1925). Modern Times (1936) is his last silent
film, interweaving intertitles and spoken words for satiric effect.
Limelight (1952), his most autobiographical film, did badly at the box
office because of his alleged Communist sympathies. His final three
features were also poorly received. Nonetheless, Chaplin embodied the
essence of modernism. The Little Review, where James Joyces Ulysses (1922)
was first serialised, published an admiring article calling him the Mob-
God, a figure who embodied the gestalt of the times (1916).

      When WW I broke out Chaplin did not enlist, which momentarily dipped
his appeal; he returned to popularity in the post-War period with hits like
The Kid (1921) and The Gold Rush (1925). Chaplin grew restless with the
Tramp persona and wanted to leave it behind (Casseres, NYTimes,
12/12/1920), but it was not until The Great Dictator (1940) that he
abandoned it. This was also his first sound film. Chaplin was late to
embrace talkies, believing speech would detract from his films universal
appeal. Modern Times (1936) is his last silent film, using both
intertitle,spoken words, and a gibberish song. He was exiled from the US at
the height of McCarthyism in 1953. Limelight (1952) and his final features
were poorly received at the box office.

      Chaplin embodied the essence of modernism in his person and his work.
The Little Review published an admiring article calling him the Mob-God,
a figure who personified the gestalt of the times (May 1916). Notable among
his fans are playwright Bertolt Brecht; author Jack London, whose short
story The Road was inspired by the Tramp; and playwright Samuel Beckett,
who initially wanted Chaplin for his film, Film (1964) (Buster Keaton
played the role). Chaplin admired and befriended H. G. Wells and Bernard
Shaw, and also the writer Max Eastman.

      With the Tramp character, Chaplin manifests the modernist fascination
with social outcasts and derelicts that traces back to Charles Baudelaire
(see: Le Vin de chiffoniers/ The Rag-Pickers Wine), and continues with
Joyce, T. S. Eliot, Beckett, and to an extent, George Orwell. Although not
a Freudian, Chaplins psychologically-nuanced acting echoes modernisms
interest in the unconscious. Modernists are simultaneously fascinated and
guarded towards new technology; Chaplin was the same, embracing film but
resisting sound. To critics today, Chaplins films are ambivalent in their
politics. Franois Truffaut declares that one could say that Charlot is a
marginal (Bazin xxiii) and Maland calls Modern Times a cultural
artefact of the mid-Depression years (257). Chaplins work now looks
iconic instead of doctrinaire.



List of Works

Full length features:

    The Kid (1921)

    A Woman of Paris (1923)

    The Gold Rush (1925)

    The Circus (1928)

    City Lights (1931)

    Modern Times (1936)

    The Great Dictator (1940)

    Monsieur Verdoux (1947)

    Limelight (1952)

    A King in New York (1957)

    A Countess from Hong Kong (1967)



References and further reading

The Mob-God (1916-05), The Little Review
<http://dl.lib.brown.edu/mjp/render.php?id=1293025571530500&view=mjp_object>


BBCs On This Day (17/5/1978)
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/may/17/newsid_2512000/2512
129.stm>

Casseres, B. (1920) The Hamlet-Like Nature of Charlie Chaplin
<http://www.benjamindecasseres.com/?page_id=233>

Lynn, K. S. (1997) Charlie Chaplin and His Times, New York: Simon &
Schuster. (An exhaustive biography with particular emphasis on Chaplins
psychology.)

Maland, C. J., Geiger, J. (ed.), Rutsky, R. L. (ed.) (2005) Modern Times
(1936) in Film Analysis: A Norton Reader, New York: W. W. Norton & Co.
(Excellent overview of historical background and critical responses to the
film.)

Milton, J. (1998) Tramp: The Life of Charlie Chaplin, Cambridge, MA: Da
Capo Press. (Another exhaustive biography that complements Lynns study.)

Truffaut, F., Bazin, A. (ed.) (1985) Essays on Chaplin, New Haven:
University of New Haven Press. (Includes essays by Bazin, Truffaut, and
Rohmer among others.)

Ria Banerjee
The Graduate Center, CUNY



