

B.K. Grindstaff
1121 N. Sage Court
Sunnyvale CA 94087
USA
bgrindst@yahoo.com

Frank, Robert (1924-- )

Renowned for photography free of sentimentality and classicising
tendencies, photographer and filmmaker Robert Frank was born in Switzerland
in 1924. He acquired American citizenship in 1963.  Frank was effectively
barred from formal training in Switzerland due to his fathers status as a
stateless German Jew. Instead, Frank acquired technical skills, exposure to
New Photography, and work in commercial photography from apprenticeships.
In 1947 he moved to New York City and worked under Alexey Brodovitch at
Harpers Bazaar until dissatisfaction prompted a period of artistic
experimentation in South America and Europe from 1947-1950.  Edward
Steichen included his work from this period in the Museum of Modern Art
exhibitions 51 American Photographers(1950) and Post-War European
Photography (1953). Steichen joined Walker Evans in supporting Franks
successful bid for the Guggenheim Fellowship (1955, renewed 1956).  The
award supported The Americans (1958, 1959), a polarising document of pre-
civil rights America, which featured an introduction by Jack Kerouac. Frank
collaborated with Kerouac, Allen Ginsberg and other Beat poets on the short
film Pull My Daisy (1959). Frank continued to direct and provide
cinematography for films and documentaries until 1993. In 1990, the Robert
Frank Collection was established at the National Gallery of Art in
Washington, D.C.

References and further reading:
Greenough S. and Phillip Brookman.  (1994) Robert Frank.  Washington, D.C.:
National Gallery of Art.
Podcast of the Annual Elson Lecture (2009), Robert Frank, NGA, Washington.
http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/audio-video/audio/elson-frank.html

