
Gill, Eric (1882-1940)

Eric Gill was an important figure in the development of modern British
sculpture in the early twentieth century. As an advocate of hand-making in
small workshops, he came to be seen as one of the main proponents of the
method of direct carving. Having formed a close working relationship with
Jacob Epstein between 1910 and 1912, and with the support of Roger Fry,
Gills sculptures were seen to represent modernity through carving,
simplification and the use of British stones. Gills work as a typographer,
letter cutter, wood engraver and essayist also placed him, during his
lifetime, at the heart of many modern movements in Britain, such as the
Society of Wood Engravers. As a writer and prolific sculptor for public
architecture in the 1930s he became prominent in the popular press. As a
Catholic convert his views, and the religious subject matter of his art,
have complicated his status in the art historical canon. Since his death it
has been largely through his letter cutting and typography that Gill
remains an important and influential figure.

Gill first trained as an architect, before studying stone masonry and
decorative lettering. In 1903 he set up business as a decorative letter and
inscription cutter, and in 1905 moved to the Arts and Crafts community in
Hammersmith. In 1907 Gill moved his family and workshop to Ditchling,
Sussex where he took up wood engraving and, in 1909, carved his first
figurative sculpture. In 1911 Gill had his first solo sculpture exhibition
at the Chenil Gallery, London. He was supported by William Rothenstein,
Roger Fry and formed close friendships with Augustus John and Jacob
Epstein. Gills first major public sculptures were the Stations of the
Cross for Westminster Cathedral.  In 1920 Gill co-founded the Guild of St
Joseph and St Dominic. A collection of Catholic craftsmen working and
living by their own means, it continued until 1989.

The 1920s saw Gills career grow and he was one of the founder members of
the Society of Wood Engravers in 1920. In 1924 Gill moved to a remote old
monastery in South Wales. There he designed his first typeface (Perpetua,
1925-8) before designing his most widely available type Gill Sans in 1927-
8. He also started a close collaboration with Robert Gibbings of the Golden
Cockerell Press and illustrated and co-designed a number of publications
including The Canterbury Tales (1929-31) and The Four Gospels (1931).

In 1928 Gill left Wales and moved his extended family, workshops and a
printing press to South Buckinghamshire. In early 1928 he also held his
fourth, and last, solo exhibition which included his largest freestanding
stone sculpture, Mankind (1927-8). From 1929 to his death in 1940, public
sculpture commissions dominated Gills sculpture output: the London
Underground headquarters, for which he carved three relief Winds (1928-9),
the new BBC headquarters (19313), the Palestine Archaeological Museum in
Jerusalem (1934) and the League of Nations in Geneva (19378).

During his career as a sculptor, engraver and letter cutter, Gill was also
a prolific writer. His output included essays, books, letters and pamphlets
about diverse subjects such as money, education, clothing, religion and
typography. Gills legacy is complicated. During his lifetime his
philosophy of hand-making, in small workshops, and a limited engagement
with modernity through architecture and typography was important in public
and artistic circles. The 1989 biography of Gill, revealing his sexual
deviancy, has further complicated his place in the art historical canon.

References and Further Reading

Collins, Judith. Eric Gill The Sculpture: Catalogue Raisonne. London:
Herbert
      Press, 1998. Print.
Gill, Evan. The Inscriptional Work of Eric Gill. An Inventory. London:
Cassell & Co.,
      1964. Print.
---. Eric Gill: A Bibliography. 2nd ed. revised by D. Steven Corey and
Julia
      Mackenzie. Winchester: St. Pauls Bibliographies, [1953] 1991. Print.
MacCarthy, Fiona. Eric Gill. London: Faber & Faber, 1989. Print.
Skelton, Christopher. Eric Gill: The Engravings. Wellingborough:
Christopher
      Skelton, 1983. Print.
Yorke, Malcolm. Eric Gill: Man of Flesh and Spirit. London: Constable,
1981. Print.
