
Helena Bonett


Hepworth, Dame (Jocelyn) Barbara (19031975)

Barbara Hepworth was a sculptor, draughtsperson, painter and printmaker,
born in Yorkshire but based in London and St Ives in Cornwall, with a
career spanning from the late 1920s to her death in 1975. Known for her
pioneering abstract sculpture  including pierced forms and multipart
arrangements  Hepworth was one of the leaders of the modernist movement in
British visual arts. Her work also shares a confluence of ideas with
modernists on the continent, many of whom she first met in France in the
1930s. At that time, her work was predominantly carved in wood and stone,
but from the 1940s Hepworth began working with new materials, employing
stringing and colour in her carved pieces, and, in the following decade,
using plaster and bronze to create large-scale works. She was a member of
many groups, including Abstraction-Cration in Paris, the 7 & 5 Society and
Unit One in London, and the Penwith Society of Arts in St Ives. Engaged in
a male-dominated art form, Hepworth struggled to gain the same recognition
as contemporaries such as Henry Moore. Despite these difficulties, however,
she gradually gained a reputation on the international stage. Today,
Hepworth remains one of Britains most famous and best-loved sculptors.

Jocelyn Barbara Hepworth was born on 10 January 1903 in Wakefield,
Yorkshire, and studied at Leeds School of Art and the Royal College of Art,
London, where her contemporaries included Henry Moore (1898-1986). While in
Italy on a scholarship, Hepworth learnt stone carving and married the
sculptor John Skeaping (1901-1980). (They had one child, Paul, who died in
1953.) Upon returning to London, she held her first exhibition, alongside
Skeaping, in 1928. Hepworths work at this time was figurative, carved out
of stone or wood, with a formal, hieratic quality, as in Figure of a Woman
(192930, Tate).


[pic]

Ida Kar (19081974), Barbara Hepworth at Work on the Armature of a
Sculpture, 1961. Vintage bromide print, 202 x 252 mm.  National Portrait
Gallery, London (NPG x88513).  National Portrait Gallery, London


The couple separated and Hepworth partnered with the painter Ben Nicholson
(1894-1982), who introduced her to Christian Science and with whom she had
triplets. They lived at 7 The Mall, Hampstead, where a community of
modernist artists formed, including Henry and Irina Moore (1907-1989), the
art writer Herbert Read (1893-1968), the constructivist sculptor Naum Gabo
(1890-1977) and, later, the abstract painter Piet Mondrian (1872-1944).
During the 1930s, Hepworth and Nicholson visited France together where they
met artists including Brancusi, Braque, Calder, Kandinsky, Mondrian, and
Picasso.

A breakthrough came for Hepworth when she first pierced the block, in
Pierced Form (1932, destroyed). She also began creating multipart abstract
sculptures, sometimes with incised figurative marks, as in Two Forms (1933,
Tate). Hepworth and Nicholson demonstrated their commitment to abstraction
in joint exhibitions during 193233. They also collaborated with others on
the publication Circle: International Survey of Constructive Art (1937).
Left-wing in her political views, Hepworth contributed to Artists
International Association exhibitions and designed a Monument to the
Spanish War (193839, destroyed).

[pic]
Barbara Hepworth (19031975), Two Forms, 193. Alabaster on limestone base,
260 x 296 x 176 mm
Tate (T07123).  Bowness, Hepworth Estate. Photo  Tate


Just before the outbreak of war, Hepworth and her family moved to Cornwall
at the invitation of the writer Adrian Stokes (1902-1979). Gabo also joined
them, working closely alongside Hepworth in 193946. Hepworth began to
introduce colour and stringing into her work. She was also influenced by
the Cornish landscape, as in Pelagos (1946, Tate). In 1943, Hepworths
first retrospective exhibition was held in Leeds. In 194749, she made a
series of around seventy figurative drawings in hospitals, at the
invitation of her friend, the surgeon Norman Capener.

Living initially in Carbis Bay, Hepworth acquired Trewyn Studio in St Ives
in 1949, where she lived and worked until her death in 1975. Now with more
space and the ability to work outside, Hepworth could sculpt on a larger
scale. She was commissioned to carve Contrapuntal Forms, standing at over
three metres in height, for the 1951 Festival of Britain. For the first
time, Hepworth employed assistants, which increased her productivity over
the coming decades. These assistants would include Terry Frost (1915-2003),
John Milne (1931-1978), Denis Mitchell (1912-1993) and John Wells (1907-
2000).

The musical title of Contrapuntal Forms reflects Hepworths new friendship
with the South African composer Priaulx Rainier (1903-1986), who also
helped to shape the subtropical garden at Trewyn and composed music for the
first film on Hepworth, Figures in a Landscape: Cornwall and the Sculpture
of Barbara Hepworth (Dudley Shaw Ashton, 1953). With Rainier and the
composer Michael Tippett (1905-1998), Hepworth organised the St Ives
Festival of Music and the Arts in 1953. Tippett later asked Hepworth to
design the sets and costumes for The Midsummer Marriage, which premiered at
the Royal Opera House in 1955.

In the 1950s Hepworth began to experiment with using sheet metal, as in
Orpheus (Maquette 2) (Version II) (1956, edition 1959, Tate), as well as
creating organic, flowing shapes in plaster over aluminium armatures cast
in bronze, as in Sea Form (Porthmeor) (1958, Tate). Quicker to sculpt than
wood or stone, these new materials also allowed Hepworth to respond to the
increasing demand for her work, both in Britain and abroad.

[pic]
Barbara Hepworth (19031975), Orpheus (Maquette 2) (Version II), 1956,
edition 1959. Copper and cotton string on wooden base, 1149 x 432 x 415 mm.
Tate (T00955).  Bowness, Hepworth Estate. Photo  Tate

In 1961 Hepworth acquired a former Palais de Danse, opposite Trewyn Studio,
where she worked on large-scale public commissions, including Winged Figure
(196162, John Lewis, London) and Single Form (196164, United Nations, New
York). A BBC documentary made by John Read, first broadcast in 1961, shows
Hepworth at work in her studios, with sculptures in Trewyn and the Palais,
and emphasises the influence of the Cornish landscape. The words Hepworth
speaks in this documentary were adapted for her Pictorial Autobiography
(1970). Towards the end of her life, Hepworth created some complex,
multipart sculptures, as in The Family of Man (1970), Conversation with
Magic Stones(1973) and Fallen Images (197475, Tate).

Hepworth died in a fire in her first-floor studio at Trewyn on 20 May 1975.
In accordance with her wishes, Hepworths executors established the Barbara
Hepworth Museum and Sculpture Garden at Trewyn, which opened in 1976. The
museum has been popular since its opening and has been managed by Tate
since 1980. In 2011, a newly built gallery, The Hepworth Wakefield, opened
in the sculptors hometown with a significant donation of 44 full-size
working models from the Hepworth Estate.


References and further reading

Hepworth, B. and Read, H. (1952), Barbara Hepworth: Carvings and Drawings,
London: Lund Humphries

Hodin, J.P. and Bowness, A. (1961),Barbara Hepworth, London: Lund
Humphries

Hepworth, B. (1970, revised 1978, republished 1985),A Pictorial
Autobiography, London: Tate Publishing

Bowness, A. (1971), The Complete Sculpture of Barbara Hepworth 196069,
London: Lund Humphries

Thistlewood, D. (ed.) (1996), Barbara Hepworth Reconsidered,Liverpool:
Liverpool University Press and Tate Gallery Liverpool

Curtis, P. (1998), Barbara Hepworth, London: Tate Publishing

Gale, M. and Stephens,C. (1999), Barbara Hepworth: Works in the Tate
Gallery Collection and the Barbara Hepworth Museum, St Ives,London: Tate
Publishing (entries online http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artists/dame-barbara-
hepworth-1274)







