

Impressionism in Australia

Although Australian colonial artists were aware of French Impressionism in
the mid-1880s, their understanding of the term derived from reading
European sources and seeing poor black-and-white reproductions, rather than
from experiencing the actual paintings themselves. As Impressionism was to
them more an idea than a method, they abandoned their studios to paint
contemporary subjects out-of-doorscapturing not only the Australian
landscape and way of life but also the clarity of Australian lightwithout
reference to the specific colour techniques of French Impressionism. This
apparent rejection of traditional art practice happened to coincide with
the rise in nationalist sentiment associated with the 1888 centenary of
European settlement in Australia. The concepts of naturalism and
nationalism were therefore conflated and Australian impressionist painting
became synonymous with Australian national identity. The term Australian
Impressionism is usually reserved for a particular group of artists
associated with the National Gallery of Victoria School, who gathered to
paint en plein air in semi-rural districts close to Melbourne.  The group
is widely known as The Heidelberg School, a name coined in 1889 by the
critic Sidney Dickinson (1851-1919) after the location of a second camp on
Melbournes fringe that was temporary home to Arthur Streeton (1867-1943)
and frequented by Tom Roberts (1856-1931) and Charles Conder (1868-1909).

The first of this groups informal weekend camps was set up at Box Hill in
late 1885 by Roberts, Fred McCubbin (1855-1917) and Louis Abrahams (1852-
1903), where they and their fellow artists painted closely-focused intimate
glimpses of the surrounding bush. [IMAGE 1] The landscapes painted from
1888 at the later Heidelberg camp were more expansive and
characteristically coloured bright blue and gold (considered Australias
national colours until green and gold were so proclaimed in 1984). [IMAGE
2] The key members of the so-called Heidelberg school are usually given
as Roberts, McCubbin, Streeton and Conder; however, in a group
retrospective exhibition held at the National Gallery of Victoria in 2007,
other usually overlooked artists were represented by the inclusion of a
fifth and female addition: Jane Sutherland (1853-1928).

The fact that these artists identified themselves as impressionists can be
seen in their 9 x 5 Impressionist Exhibition of 1889; a deliberately
provocative exhibition of spontaneous sketches executed on small wooden
cigar-box lids (hence the name 9 x 5). Presumably the brainchild of
Roberts (who promoted the event through his society contacts) and Conder
(who designed the catalogues symbolist cover), the exhibition included
over 180 exhibits that supposedly confirmed the accompanying statement that
An Effect is only momentary. James Smith (critic for the Argus) dismissed
both this interpretation of impressionism, and the individual works
themselves, in words very similar to those used by Ruskin in his 1877
criticism of Whistler. Indeed, the 9 x 5 exhibition, with its emphasis on
aesthetic display and colour harmonies, owed more to Whistler than to Monet
and Renoir.

Following the growing recognition of impressionism as more than a French-
based specialty but instead a world-wide modernist movement, the term
Australian Impressionism now includes plein-airists who worked in Sydney
where Julian Ashton (1851-1942) and Alfred Daplyn (1844-1926) had taught
Conder in 1887, and where Tom Roberts and Arthur Streeton relocated in the
1890s. It also includes artists such as Walter Withers (1854-1914) and
Emanuel Phillips Fox (1865-1915), who were still painting near Melbourne
with the same fresh palette and loose brushwork long after the original
Heidelberg foursome had gone their separate ways. Despite images such as
Conders Holiday at Mentone [IMAGE 3]which by any measure is an exemplar
of fashionable urban modernityimpressionism to Australian eyes remains
inextricably linked with nostalgic bush landscapes and national identity.



IMAGE 1

[pic]
Tom Roberts, A Summer Morning Tiff 1886, Art Gallery of Ballarat

(Reproduction rights held by the Art Gallery of Ballarat
Email:artgal@ballarat.vic.gov.au)
or see
http://www.qagoma.qld.gov.au/__data/assets/image/0004/73822/2009.02_086PN.jp
g



IMAGE 2


[pic]
Arthur Streeton, Golden Summer, Eaglemont 1889, National Gallery of
Australia


(http://artsearch.nga.gov.au/Detail.cfm?IRN=61325)



IMAGE 3


[pic]
Charles Conder, Holiday at Mentone 1888, Art Gallery of South Australia


(http://www.artgallery.sa.gov.au/agsa/home/Collection/detail.jsp?ecatKey=164
5)



REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING

Astbury, Leigh (1985) City Bushmen: The Heidelberg School and the Rural
Mythology. Melbourne: Oxford University Press. (Essential reading for
understanding the cultural and social issuesboth local and
internationalthat affected the emergence of Australian Impressionism.)

Clark, Jane, and Whitelaw, Bridget (1985) Golden Summers: Heidelberg and
Beyond. Melbourne: International Cultural Corporation of Australia.
(Scholarly catalogue of the exhibition that not only marked the centenary
of the first Box Hill artists camp, but also the repatriation of
Streetons iconic landscape, Golden Summer, Eaglemont 1889.)

Hammond, Victoria, and Peers, Juliet (1992). Completing the Picture: Women
Artists and the Heidelberg Era, Melbourne: Artmoves. (Catalogue of the
groundbreaking exhibition that redresses the gender imbalance of previous
studies of Australian Impressionism.)

Lane, Terence (ed.) (2007) Australian Impressionism. Melbourne: National
Gallery of Victoria. (Comprehensive catalogue of the retrospective
exhibition that, in firmly replacing usage of the term Heidelberg School
with Australian Impressionism, argues for a global rather than a provincial
context for these artists and their work. Essential reading for its
thematic scholarly essays and for its illustrations.)

Smith, James (1889) An Impressionist Exhibition, Argus (Melbourne), 17
August 1889, 10 (A critique of impressionism by Melbournes most
influential art critic of the time. See
http://trove.nla.gov.au/ndp/del/article/6271593 )

Spate, Virginia (1990) The Sunny South: Australian Impressionism, in
Norma Broude (ed.) World Impressionism: The International Movement, 1860-
1920. New York: H.N. Abrams, 114-35 (An important article that seriously
analyzes Australian impressionism in a world-wide context.)
